### Abstract

Plant disease classification using deep learning techniques has shown promising results, especially when models are trained on high-quality  images. However, these models often suffer from a significant drop in their accuracies when tested in real world agricultural settings. In-the-wild, models encounter images which are significantly different from the training data in aspects like lighting conditions, capturing conditions, image resolution and the severity of disease. This discrepancy between the training and images in-the-wild conditions poses a major challenge for deploying these models in agricultural settings. In this paper, we present a novel approach to address this issue by combining a Vision Transformer backbone with a mixture of experts where multiple expert models are trained to specialize in different aspects of the input data, and a gating mechanism is implemented to select the most relevant experts for each input. The use of Mixture of Experts allows the model to dynamically allocate specialized experts to different types of input data, improving model performance across diverse image conditions. The approach significantly improves performance on diverse datasets that contain a range of image capturing conditions and disease severities. Furthermore, the model incorporates entropy regularization and orthogonal regularization which aims to enhance the robustness and generalization capabilities. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed model achieved a 20\% improvement in accuracy compared to Vision Transformer (ViT) and a 38.46\% reduction in errors when tested on diverse datasets with varying background and foreground conditions. Furthermore, it demonstrated a 68\% accuracy on cross-domain datasets like PlantVillage to PlantDoc, surpassing baseline models such as InceptionV3 and EfficientNet by at least 25\%. This highlights the potential of our model for effective deployment in dynamic agricultural environments.

You can download the models using below links:
[Model without regularizations](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1xQgFfu5T71eP2uRoxSbZLD3vgesvahE_/view?usp=sharing)

[Model withregularizations](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1gXmmlYcg8s22g1cJpleySS2LmAXR5aIQ/view?usp=sharing)
